{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2867
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid202\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid302\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid4}
{\list\listtemplateid5\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid401\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid402\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid5}
{\list\listtemplateid6\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid501\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid6}
{\list\listtemplateid7\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid601\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid7}
{\list\listtemplateid8\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid701\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid8}
{\list\listtemplateid9\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid801\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid9}
{\list\listtemplateid10\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid901\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid10}
{\list\listtemplateid11\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1001\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid11}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}{\listoverride\listid5\listoverridecount0\ls5}{\listoverride\listid6\listoverridecount0\ls6}{\listoverride\listid7\listoverridecount0\ls7}{\listoverride\listid8\listoverridecount0\ls8}{\listoverride\listid9\listoverridecount0\ls9}{\listoverride\listid10\listoverridecount0\ls10}{\listoverride\listid11\listoverridecount0\ls11}}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa321\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 An In-Depth Guide to Crafting a PDA-Affirming Individualized Education Program (IEP)\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\fs36 \cf0 1.0 A Foundational Shift: Understanding the PDA Profile of Autism\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 Crafting an effective Individualized Education Program (IEP) for a student with a Pathological Demand Avoidance (PDA) profile of autism requires more than just a list of accommodations; it demands a fundamental shift in mindset. Traditional special education frameworks, often built on principles of compliance and behavioral modification, are frequently ineffective and can be actively harmful to this neurotype. Before any strategy can be successful, the entire IEP team must first understand the "why" behind PDA. This understanding is the non-negotiable first step toward creating a truly supportive and affirming educational plan that fosters trust, reduces anxiety, and allows learning to happen.\
Pathological Demand Avoidance, also known as a Pervasive Drive for Autonomy, is understood as a profile of autism. It is rooted in a nervous system difference characterized by persistently high anxiety and a survival-driven, instinctual need for control and autonomy. A PDA learner's avoidance of everyday demands is not a choice or a matter of defiance, but a neurological response to a perceived threat.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Key Traits of the PDA Profile:
\f1\b0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Resists and avoids the ordinary demands of life, often using social strategies to do so (e.g., making excuses like "my legs don't work," distracting, or negotiating).\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Appears sociable on the surface but may lack a deeper understanding of social nuances and often does not appreciate social hierarchies or age differences.\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Uses social strategies as part of avoidance but can have adaptive social skills with blind spots.\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Experiences intense and sudden mood changes, often driven by a sense of hyper-vigilance.\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Displays obsessive traits and strong interests, which are often focused on people rather than things.\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Enjoys and becomes engrossed in role-play and pretend, sometimes to the point of confusing fantasy with reality.\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Experiences avoidance even for activities they genuinely want to do or enjoy.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Deconstructing the ABC Model of Behavior\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 The traditional Antecedent-Behavior-Consequence (ABC) model, a cornerstone of many behavioral interventions, is particularly ill-suited for PDA learners. As analyzed by Dr. Casey Ehrlich, its core assumptions break down when applied to a nervous system operating from a constant state of threat.\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Antecedent (A):
\f1\b0  In the ABC model, the antecedent is an observable trigger that precedes a behavior. For a PDA child, the true "antecedent" is often the 
\f0\b cumulative and unobservable stress
\f1\b0  on their nervous system. For instance, a child who masks all day at school has a meltdown when their mother asks the simple question, "how was your day?" The question wasn't the true antecedent; it was the "final straw" that tipped a chronically activated nervous system past its threshold.\
\ls2\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Behavior (B):
\f1\b0  The ABC model views behavior as a planned or motivated action. For a PDA learner, what appears as "behavior" is more accurately the 
\f0\b behavioral expression of a subconscious survival response
\f1\b0  (fight, flight, or freeze). It is an automatic reaction initiated by the survival brain, not a premeditated act. As Dr. Ehrlich explains, "If you were in a near fatal car crash or was threatened with a gun in a dark alley, your body and brain would respond without you having to think about it... You would never apply the ABC framework for trying to change your behavior because what happened was a survival response."\
\ls2\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Consequence (C):
\f1\b0  The model relies on consequences (rewards or sanctions) to modify behavior. However, a brain operating in survival mode 
\f0\b cannot process consequences or use them as a motivator
\f1\b0 . Applying rewards or sanctions to a panic response is ineffective and often increases the child's nervous system activation, further escalating the situation.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 The Role of a Hypersensitive "Neuroception"\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 The concept of "neuroception," coined by Dr. Stephen Porges, is central to understanding the PDA brain. Neuroception is the subconscious, automatic process by which our nervous system scans the environment for cues of safety and danger. In PDA individuals, this system is hypersensitive.\
A perceived loss of autonomy or equality is processed by the PDA brain as a life-threatening danger, equivalent to being threatened in a dark alley or experiencing a near-fatal car crash. This triggers an immediate, non-volitional survival response. The resulting fight, flight, or freeze reaction is not a choice; it is an automatic, physiological process driven by the deepest parts of the brain designed to keep the individual alive.\
Understanding this neurological foundation reveals the profound strengths that often accompany this profile.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 2.0 Recognizing PDA Strengths and Reframing the Narrative\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 Adopting a strengths-based perspective is a strategic and essential component of supporting a PDA learner. Too often, the narrative is defined by challenges and deficits. Recognizing and actively leveraging the innate strengths of PDA individuals is critical for building the trust, fostering the engagement, and creating the truly supportive learning environment they need to thrive. By focusing on what these students 
\f2\i can
\f1\i0  do, we open pathways for connection and growth.\
Dr. Casey Ehrlich has identified six innate characteristics that can be viewed as the "superpowers" of the PDA profile.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Drive for Equality and Social Justice\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 When regulated and not feeling pressured, PDA children often become powerful advocates for fairness. They are quick to notice when someone is being treated unjustly, left out, or bullied. This innate drive for equality compels them to defend the underdog, whether it's ensuring a peer gets a turn on the playground or fighting for a younger sibling's "rights" in the household, such as deserving a second helping of dessert.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Alchemy, Creativity, and Innovation\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 PDA brains are often wired to create, innovate, and transform. They are modern-day alchemists, drawn to activities that involve combining, melting, mixing, or reconfiguring materials to create something entirely new. This creativity manifests in countless ways, such as inventing new words, transforming recycling into musical instruments, or melting crayons into new shapes. They possess a unique ability to see possibilities where others see limitations.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Energetic and Truth Radar\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 PDA individuals possess a keen ability to sense the truth in a situation. They can detect misalignment between a person's words, facial expressions, and their underlying intentions or feelings. While this can be challenging for adults who are not fully aligned in their approach, it is a powerful strength. When affirmed, this "truth radar" can guide them toward a life of authenticity and integrity.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Animal Spirit Connection\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 Many PDA children share a deep, almost instinctual connection with animals. Animals can provide a sense of safety and calm that is difficult to achieve in human interactions. This connection is often present from birth and can be a powerful resource for co-regulation and therapeutic engagement, as the non-judgmental presence of an animal does not present a demand.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Humor and Magnetic Charisma\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 When their nervous system is accommodated and they feel safe, PDA individuals often have an engaging and enveloping sense of humor. They delight in making others laugh through jokes, pranks, and a general sense of goofiness. Their charisma can be magnetic, drawing others into their world of creative ideas, new projects, and playful explorations.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Auto-Didactic (Self-Taught)\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 PDA learners are exceptionally good at teaching themselves. While they may vehemently resist traditional, structured instruction, they are constantly learning through observation and direct experience. When a topic captures their interest, and they have the autonomy to pursue it on their own terms, they can acquire skills and knowledge with remarkable speed and depth. This makes self-directed educational models a particularly good fit for this neurotype.\
Understanding these strengths is not just a feel-good exercise; it provides the key to unlocking the practical, actionable principles required for their education.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 3.0 The Core Principles of a PDA-Friendly Educational Approach\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 Effective support for PDA learners requires moving beyond a simple checklist of accommodations and adopting a set of core principles that guide every interaction and decision. These principles are not add-ons; they are the foundation of the educational environment. They are intentionally designed to lower anxiety, build a bank of trust, and create the physiological state of safety that is a prerequisite for any meaningful learning to occur.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 From Compliance to Connection and Co-regulation\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 The single most important shift for an IEP team is moving the primary goal from short-term 
\f0\b compliance
\f1\b0  to long-term 
\f0\b connection
\f1\b0 . Progress is not measured by a student's immediate obedience to a command but by the strength of the relationship and their growing ability to manage distress. This requires a profound understanding that a regulated adult is a prerequisite for a regulated child. Adults must be able to "lend their calm nervous system" to the student, modeling regulation and providing constant, non-verbal cues of safety.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 The Three Non-Negotiable Supports\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 To create an environment of nervous system safety, three accommodations are paramount: 
\f0\b Autonomy
\f1\b0 , 
\f0\b Equality
\f1\b0 , and 
\f0\b Lowering Demands
\f1\b0 .\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Autonomy (Freedom and Choice):
\f1\b0  The drive for autonomy is a survival need. Providing choice preempts the threat response and builds trust.\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl1\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Allow the student to choose whether or not to participate in an activity.\
\ls3\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Let the student change the rules of a game or win every time to achieve mastery.\
\ls3\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Offer choices in how, when, or where a task is completed (e.g., "Do you want me to sit with you or check back in 5 minutes?").\
\ls3\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Do not correct small errors if they are not critical to the learning objective.\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Equality (Collaboration and Respect):
\f1\b0  The perception of being "less than" an authority figure is a significant threat trigger. Interactions must be collaborative, not hierarchical.\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl1\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Physically position yourself at or below the child's eye level when talking to them.\
\ls3\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Allow the child to walk into a room first or have the last word.\
\ls3\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Frame yourself as a mentor or collaborator rather than an authority figure.\
\ls3\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Give the student a special role or "teacher helper" status to equalize the power dynamic.\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Lowering Demands:
\f1\b0  The capacity of a PDA learner fluctuates daily. Demands must be adjusted based on the student's current level of regulation, not their perceived capability.\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl1\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Permit the student to opt out of homework to allow for nervous system recovery.\
\ls3\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Reduce the number of required problems or modify assignments to include only essential content.\
\ls3\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 "Share the demand" by offering to do part of the task for or with the student.\
\ls3\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Recognize that even enjoyable activities or self-imposed demands can be demands and trigger a threat response.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Essential Communication Accommodations\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 How we communicate can either activate or accommodate the PDA nervous system. Direct questions and commands are often perceived as demands and trigger a threat response.\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls4\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Declarative Language:
\f1\b0  This is the practice of making statements or observations rather than asking questions or giving commands. It "strews" information that the child can choose to engage with or not, preserving their autonomy.\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\partightenfactor0
\ls4\ilvl1\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Instead of "What do you want to draw?" try "
\f0\b I notice
\f1\b0  the blue marker is on the table."\
\ls4\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Instead of "Do you want to play?" try "
\f0\b I wonder
\f1\b0  what would happen if we built a tower."\
\ls4\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Instead of "Let's go to the sensory room," try "
\f0\b I'm thinking
\f1\b0  about going to the sensory room."\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls4\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Indirect Communication:
\f1\b0  Using less direct methods of communication can significantly reduce pressure. This can include using visual prompts, communicating through a puppet or favorite toy, using humor and silliness, or engaging in role-play.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 These guiding principles form the philosophical backbone of the IEP, which can now be translated into the formal structure of the document, beginning with accommodations.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 4.0 Building the PDA-Affirming IEP: Accommodations and Supports\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 This section translates the core principles of a PDA-affirming approach into the practical, legally binding accommodations of an IEP. Success hinges on adopting an experimental, flexible, and collaborative mindset. There is no one-size-fits-all protocol; strategies must be tailored to the individual student and adjusted based on their fluctuating capacity. The goal is to build a toolkit of supports that reduce nervous system activation and create opportunities for engagement.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Contrasting Approaches to Common Accommodations\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 Many standard special education accommodations, when applied rigidly, can be counter-indicative for PDA learners. The table below illustrates the necessary shift in approach.\

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth4625\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth10635\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Traditional/Unhelpful for PDA\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 PDA-Affirming Alternative\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth4625\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth10635\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 A rigid, non-negotiable visual schedule presented to the student.\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 A flexible "rhythm" or visual guide created 
\f2\i collaboratively
\f1\i0  with the student, used as a suggestion, not an expectation.\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth4625\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth10635\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Token boards, sticker charts, or "First/Then" statements.\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Surprise rewards given spontaneously for effort, or natural rewards like, "Wow, you finished that, now you have free choice time until your friends are done!"\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth4625\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth10635\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Forced participation in structured group work or social skills groups.\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 An optional buddy system, adult-facilitated social interactions, or parallel play opportunities.\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth4625\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth10635\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Scheduled, predetermined breaks (e.g., "break at 10:15").\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 A "hot pass" or "cool off card" that allows the student to request a break from a safe adult whenever they feel overwhelmed.\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth4625\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth10635\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Requiring a task to be completed in a linear, prescribed way.\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 "Strewing" materials for discovery, sharing the demand (adult does part of the work), or allowing work to begin in the middle.\cell \lastrow\row
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Before implementing any accommodation, it's vital for the team to adopt the right mindset. This involves embracing an "experimental mindset," recognizing that learning comes from trial and error. The guiding principle must be to "prioritize long term connection, autonomy, and nervous system support over compliance, skills, and expectations." These accommodations are not a simple checklist to be completed, but rather a dynamic set of tools in an ongoing, responsive process of building trust and safety.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Key Accommodations and Supports for a PDA-Affirming IEP\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 The following is a synthesized list of accommodations that directly support the PDA nervous system. They should be customized and implemented flexibly based on the student's needs.\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls5\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Environmental & Sensory Supports:
\f1\b0 \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\partightenfactor0
\ls5\ilvl1\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Access to a quiet, safe space (e.g., a tent or canopy in the classroom) where the student can retreat.\
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Preferential seating away from distractions and near a supportive adult or an easy exit.\
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 A personalized "sensory diet" with opportunities for movement, deep pressure, or other regulating input.\
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Provision of sensory tools like headphones, fidgets, or weighted items, with the student having autonomy over their use.\
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Early dismissal from class to avoid crowded hallways.\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls5\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Instructional & Task-Related Supports:
\f1\b0 \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\partightenfactor0
\ls5\ilvl1\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Consistent provision of choice in the topic, materials, or method of completing assignments.\
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Allowing adequate "take up time" for the student to process a suggestion before needing to act on it.\
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Incorporating the student's personal interests and passions into academic tasks whenever possible.\
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Use of a scribe or speech-to-text software to reduce the demand of writing.\
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Modified assignments that focus on essential content, with reduced length or complexity.\
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 "Strewing" of learning materials as an invitation to engage, rather than a direct assignment.\
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Allowing the student to observe an activity before being expected to join in.\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls5\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Communication & Social Supports:
\f1\b0 \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\partightenfactor0
\ls5\ilvl1\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Consistent use of 
\f0\b Declarative Language
\f1\b0  by all staff (e.g., "I wonder..." or "I notice...").\
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Advance notice of any changes to the daily routine or schedule, delivered in a non-demanding way.\
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 A buddy system or peer-to-peer tutoring for unstructured times.\
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Explicit, non-judgmental teaching about social hierarchies and unspoken rules, often through social stories or role play.\
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Adult-facilitated social interactions to scaffold peer engagement.\
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Honoring all forms of communication (verbal, gestures, AAC, etc.).\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls5\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Emotional Regulation Supports:
\f1\b0 \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\partightenfactor0
\ls5\ilvl1\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 A "hot pass" or "cool off card" allowing the student to leave the classroom to go to a predetermined safe person/place without question.\
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Prioritizing co-regulation from a trusted, calm adult as the primary strategy for de-escalation.\
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Explicit validation of the student's feelings (e.g., "I can see this is really hard for you right now").\
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9702 
\f1 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Opportunities to engage in humor, play, and novelty to de-escalate rising tension.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 With this robust framework of accommodations in place, the next step is to write IEP goals that align with this unique, supportive approach.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 5.0 Crafting Meaningful and Measurable PDA-Friendly IEP Goals\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 Traditional, compliance-based IEP goals are often inappropriate and counter-productive for PDA learners. Goals focused on task completion (e.g., "will complete 80% of worksheets") can become a source of demand and anxiety, leading to more avoidance. Instead, goals must be thoughtfully reframed to focus on building skills in areas that support the student's long-term well-being and independence, such as self-advocacy, emotional regulation, flexible thinking, and interoception.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Applying the S.M.A.R.T. Framework Through a PDA-Friendly Lens\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 The S.M.A.R.T. (Specific, Measurable, Action Words, Realistic, Time-Limited) framework remains a valuable tool, but it must be applied with a neuroaffirming perspective.\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls6\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Specific:
\f1\b0  The goal clearly states what the learner will achieve.\
\ls6\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Measurable:
\f1\b0  Progress can be tracked through criteria like frequency or accuracy, but should also include methods like student self-report and staff observation.\
\ls6\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Action Words:
\f1\b0  The language should be collaborative and empowering. Instead of "will follow," use phrases like "
\f0\b will communicate the need for
\f1\b0 ," "
\f0\b will partner with
\f1\b0 ," or "
\f0\b will use taught strategies
\f1\b0 ." This centers the student's agency.\
\ls6\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Realistic:
\f1\b0  This is the most critical adaptation. A "realistic" goal for a PDA learner must account for their 
\f0\b fluctuating capacity
\f1\b0 . Success should not be measured by consistent, linear progress but by their ability to use tools and strategies when they are regulated enough to do so.\
\ls6\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Time-Limited:
\f1\b0  A clear timeframe provides structure for the IEP team.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 IEP Goal Examples: From Counter-Productive to PDA-Affirming\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 The following table contrasts traditional, compliance-focused goals with neuroaffirming alternatives that are more appropriate for PDA learners.\

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth4669\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth10590\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Problematic 'Bad' Goal\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Neuroaffirming 'Good' Goal\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth4669\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth10590\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Academic Task Engagement:
\f1\b0  By May 2026, student will complete 80% of assigned worksheets independently.\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 By January 2026, during classroom activities when given executive functioning supports (e.g., access to a computer, graphic organizers), sensory supports, and choice for how they engage, learner will 
\f0\b begin the task
\f1\b0  within 1 minute on 4 of 5 opportunities.\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth4669\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth10590\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Emotional Regulation:
\f1\b0  By May 2026, student will reduce the number of meltdowns to no more than one per week.\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 By January 2026, the learner will 
\f0\b identify and use three preferred regulation strategies
\f1\b0  (e.g., co-regulation with a trusted adult, sensory tools, heavy work) taught through modeling and direct instruction, to support focus and engagement in 80% of observed opportunities in the classroom setting.\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth4669\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth10590\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Communication:
\f1\b0  By May 2026, student will answer teacher questions with 90% accuracy during group instruction.\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 By January 2026, the learner will 
\f0\b communicate the need for help or clarification
\f1\b0  when faced with a challenging academic task, using multimodal communication (e.g., verbal requests, visual supports, gestures, AAC, etc.), in 4 out of 5 observed opportunities.\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth4669\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth10590\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Transitions:
\f1\b0  By May 2026, student will transition between preferred and non-preferred activities without protest in 4 out of 5 trials.\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 When preparing to transition, the learner will 
\f0\b partner with a trusted adult to choose and use a taught co-regulation strategy
\f1\b0  (e.g., taking 5 deep breaths, carrying a transition object) in 4 of 5 opportunities, as measured by staff observation.\cell \lastrow\row
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Example Template for IEP Goals\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 This template from Dr. Destiny Huff provides a practical structure for drafting S.M.A.R.T., neuroaffirming goals.\
By [date \'96 typically this is a year from the IEP goal date], the learner [insert learner's name] will [skill \'96 what skill is to be developed, what action is the learner supposed to do] when [trigger -what triggers the situation or during what time does the skill need to occur] using [supports \'96 what supports will help the learner \'96 executive functioning, sensory, communication, motor, staff] in [how often will the learner demonstrate the skill \'96 4 out of 5, 80% of the time, daily, etc.] as evidenced by [Data Collection - how will data be collected, i.e. teacher observation, log sheet, learner self-report, testing, etc.].\
Once appropriate goals are set, they must be supported by a similarly nuanced and supportive Behavior Intervention Plan.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa298\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 6.0 Developing a Proactive and Supportive Behavior Intervention Plan (BIP)\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 For a PDA student, a Behavior Intervention Plan (BIP) should not be viewed as a disciplinary tool, but as a supportive, proactive roadmap for understanding and reducing nervous system distress. A PDA-affirming BIP is overwhelmingly focused on preventative strategies\'97modifying the environment, instruction, and communication to prevent the activation of the student's threat response in the first place. It is a plan for the adults in the room, guiding them on how to create safety, build trust, and respond with co-regulation when the student's survival brain takes over.\
The following components, modeled after a best-practice example, outline the structure of a supportive BIP.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Redefining Target Behaviors and Hypothesizing Function\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 First, the BIP must redefine "target behaviors" (e.g., vocal dysregulation, physical aggression, property misuse) not as willful acts of defiance, but as expressions of a nervous system in distress. The function of these behaviors is hypothesized to be a combination of avoiding overwhelming tasks, seeking attention for co-regulation, and attempting to self-regulate a panicked sensory system. This reframing is a critical first step for the entire team.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Proactive Environmental and Instructional Strategies\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 This is the core of the BIP. The goal is to create an environment so accommodating that the student can remain 
\f0\b HRE (Happy, Relaxed, and Engaged)
\f1\b0 .\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls7\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Fill the environment
\f1\b0  with preferred items (e.g., MagnaTiles, bracelet kits, electronics) that are readily available without needing to be "earned."\
\ls7\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Provide choice and autonomy
\f1\b0  in activities, seating, and movement throughout the day.\
\ls7\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Establish a calming area
\f1\b0  or safe space the student can access at any time.\
\ls7\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Use Declarative Language
\f1\b0  consistently to reduce the perception of demands. Examples include: "I wonder what would happen if we tried..." or "I'm feeling frustrated. I think I'll take a walk."\
\ls7\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Use a visual schedule flexibly
\f1\b0 , as a guide to create predictability, not as a rigid set of expectations to follow.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Teaching Replacement Behaviors\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 Instead of punishing distress behaviors, the BIP focuses on explicitly teaching and reinforcing functional communication. The student is taught to:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls8\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Request a break or "more time please."\
\ls8\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Request help or state, "I don't want to do this right now."\
\ls8\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Use a chewy or gum as an alternative to biting.\
\ls8\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Request others to stop an activity or be quiet.\
\ls8\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 All appropriate communicative requests should be honored immediately to reinforce their use.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Positive Supports and Natural Motivators\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 Traditional reward systems like token boards are avoided as they create anxiety and a sense of demand. Instead, support is relational and intrinsic.\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls9\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Pairing:
\f1\b0  Staff must dedicate time daily to building a positive relationship with the student. The goal is to show the student that "his world is more fun with you than without you!" This involves a deliberate, child-led process of building relational safety, such as passively following their lead and engaging in parallel play until the student initiates interaction.\
\ls9\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Natural Rewards:
\f1\b0  Reinforcement is provided naturally. For example, "Wow, you finished that, now you have free choice time until your friends finish!"\
\ls9\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Behavior-specific praise
\f1\b0  is used authentically, focusing on the effort or outcome (e.g., "Your letter M looks amazing").\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Reactive De-escalation Strategies\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 When the student's threat response is activated, the focus shifts entirely to co-regulation and ensuring safety.\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls10\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Remain Calm and Neutral:
\f1\b0  The adult's primary job is to be the calm in the storm.\
\ls10\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Do Not Talk About the Behavior:
\f1\b0  Instead, empathize with the student's feelings ("I'm so sorry today is hard," or "I wish I knew what you needed right now.").\
\ls10\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Block and Disengage:
\f1\b0  If aggression occurs, calmly block for safety and remove others from the immediate area if necessary.\
\ls10\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Give Space:
\f1\b0  Use declarative language and provide as much physical space as the student needs to feel safe.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Crisis Planning\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 A crisis plan is a last resort, used only when there is an immediate threat to safety. Crucially, given the potential for trauma, it must prioritize de-escalation over restraint.\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls11\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 If high rates of aggression or self-injury persist, parents are to be called immediately.\
\ls11\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 The plan must explicitly state that parents will be notified and given the option to pick the student up from school 
\f2\i before
\f1\i0  a decision for physical management is made. This acknowledges the significant trauma that restraint can cause and respects the family's role in crisis intervention, as physical management will harm his ability to remain at school long-term and hurt relationships he has formed with staff.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 This guide began by calling for a foundational shift in perspective. The journey from understanding the intricacies of the PDA nervous system to crafting a supportive Behavior Intervention Plan is not linear but a continuous loop of learning, adapting, and prioritizing the child's felt safety above all else. A successful IEP for a PDA student is a living document, built on a foundation of trust, flexibility, and a deep, compassionate understanding of the child's unique neurology. This is not just about writing a better IEP; it is about fundamentally changing the adult-child dynamic to one of trust and co-regulation, which is the only environment where a PDA child can truly build authentic skills, foster a sense of agency, and thrive.\
}